Well, hey, everybody. Welcome to the Data Science Hangout. If this is your first time
joining us today, hello. It's so nice to meet you. I'm Rachel. I lead Customer Marketing
at Posit. If this is your first Data Science Hangout, say hi in the chat, too, because
we all want to welcome you in here, especially anybody joining for the first time. This is
our open space to chat about data science leadership, questions you're facing, and getting
to hear about what's going on in the world of data across all different industries. We're
here every Thursday at the same time, same place. So if you are watching on YouTube later
sometime in the future, and you want to join us live, you can use the link below to add
it to your calendar. At the Hangouts, we're all dedicated to making this a welcoming
environment for everybody. Love to hear from everyone, no matter your years of experience,
your titles, your languages you work in, or industry. And it's totally okay if you just
want to listen in here. Maybe this is your lunch break, or you're out for a walk or something.
But if you want to jump in and add some context to something or ask questions, you can raise
your hand on Zoom, and I'll keep an eye out. You could put questions in the Zoom chat.
And feel free to just put a little star next to it if it's something you want me to read
out loud instead. And then lastly, we also have a Slido link where you can ask questions
anonymously, which I realize I forgot to create. So I will create that in one of the first
sessions, and then we'll share it in the chat here. But with that, I am so excited
to introduce my two co-hosts for today, Joseph Powers, Principal Data Scientist at Intuit,
and Jen Wang, formerly VP of Product and Growth at ThredUP. And I thought today was a really
fun example of how community and data friends happen. I met Joe at the Posit conference
recently, and we had a bit of an impromptu pizza party with Javier and Sep from the Hangouts
here too. And then Joe also introduced me to Jen here as well. So I'd love to have you both
introduce yourself and share a little bit about your background. Also, something you like to do
outside of work too.
Jen, you should lead off.
Oh, no. Okay, um, so I'm Jen Wang. I, yeah, was at ThredUP, which is an online marketplace
for secondhand clothing for five years. And before that, had done a PhD in kind of behavioral
science, looking at, you know, environmental decision making. Joe and I met during grad
school actually taking a bunch of classes, but one of them being really the data science
class that probably turned us both into data scientists. And so I'm really excited to be
here and have spent a lot of time thinking about career and all these things is something
that Joe and I have talked about over the last many, many years. And then outside of work, I
mean, I love to do a lot of things, but most recently I've been cooking a lot, a lot. So I'll
just mention that.
Yeah, I had several careers previous to this one. I was initially a furniture maker for seven
years, and I started teaching woodworking and became interested in like questions around like
students' motivation and how people like perception of their environment can like improve
their, their learning outcomes. And so that led to, yeah, getting a PhD in educational
psychology, and I had to learn programming and statistics along the way. And these data science
jobs emerged in Silicon Valley around the same time. So that was, that brought me here.
Outside of work, I still enjoy furniture making. I'm just grateful not to have to rely on it for
my primary income anymore. So yeah.
I see some love for your hobbies in the chat here. Javier, I thought you had a quick follow-up
question for Jen.
Oh, yes. Javier asked what I enjoy cooking, and I was thinking about, I was like, well,
my mistake is I often buy my veggies from Costco. So then I have to figure out like many recipes
for the same ingredient.
Awesome. Well, let's, we'll jump in here. I get to ask some of the questions in the beginning
while we wait for questions to come in from everybody. But at the Hangouts, we do often
talk a bit about hiring, but it's more often from the employer side, but thinking more from the
candidate side. I know somebody had reached out to me about that last week too. I know you both
have some experience transitioning from academia to industry, and would love to just learn a little
bit from you about maybe some tips you might have for us or people who are in a similar position.
Joe, I'll let you go first.
Okay. Yeah, I'm selecting on my own path. And then I also still speak with a lot of people
regularly who are transitioning. And I'll try to offer the advice that I wish I had, you know,
six years ago, which is that like, if you're coming out of an academic background, it's easy
to feel like you're not qualified or you're unprepared for tech careers in industry.
And that's really, really far from the truth. You're actually, you have an incredibly unique
and valued skill set. The challenge is learning how to talk about it in ways that a non-academic
is going to recognize. And I hope that's something you get out of today. And so, and this doesn't
just apply to academics. You know, if you had a career previously in like nonprofit work or
government work, and you know, you're thinking about transitioning to tech, I think a lot of
this is going to apply for you too. And so, what are the big things? Like, I think it would be easy
to miss your soft skills. And I don't use that soft term dismissively at all. They are the most
valuable skills. And these are things like the ability to take a vaguely scoped problem and turn
it into an actionable line of research. If you finish the PhD, you know how to do that. Other
factors like your ability to translate your expertise to people who are intelligent, but
don't share your particular expertise. That is a huge skill set. You know, in order for you to
have influence within your organization, you're going to need to translate your expertise to
leaders and other stakeholders who, you know, don't have your particular background. And you've
got a lot of practice in public presentation and translation during your academic experience that
most people never get. I was never formally trained in public presentation until I got into
my PhD program. And then, just out of like self-preservation, you know, your lab members
to protect the, you know, reputation and integrity of the lab, they're going to give you a lot of
guided feedback on how to present well. So, it's easy to get hung up on like, oh, I don't know how
to do this particular modeling technique in Python. And it's like, those are the hard skills
in the sense of like soft skills, but you can learn those pretty quick. You're bringing in a lot
of soft skills that are very, very rare. They're so rare, they're not going to be in the job posting
a lot of times. You're going to need to proactively plug them throughout your resume, throughout the
interview process. And I promise you, you will see the hiring managers perk up when they start
hearing about these really rare abilities that you've had the last five, six years to develop.
Yeah. And I guess to add on to that, I think there are two things that kind of come to mind for me
here is that one is that expertise is truly relative, right? Anybody who works in industry
knows this. You easily are the expert on XYZ thing in your organization because as long as you
provide, as long as you know more about that than anybody else in your organization,
you are the resident expert. And I think that when I was transitioning, that was one thing that
I worried about is, oh, I don't know enough. But I was just talking to somebody yesterday and I was
telling her like, you already know way more about this industry than anybody I've ever hired.
And 10 out of 10 times, I would rather take somebody who knows a little bit less about the
industry, but has a proven track record of being able to learn very quickly and can pick it up.
Right. So I think that's something that anybody who's in this room is clearly interested in
learning and is curious and wants to improve their skills. So I have no doubt about that.
That's kind of the first thing, like expertise is relative. And then the second one is kind of,
you know, what Joe was saying is you're trying to translate your skills into something that
your audience and people who are hiring can understand. One of the best pieces of advice I
got was from David Kelly, who kind of established the design thinking method and the d.school at
Stanford. And he really talked about how, you know, every industry and every organization
is really just a group of people who get together and kind of decide what the standards are. Right.
And you all know this in data science, the standards and data science have been evolving
and shifting and what's really high quality and the cutting edge has changed a lot.
And so in order to actually understand how to translate your skills into what's most valuable,
I personally think one of the only ways that you can do it is you have to talk to people
and you have to talk to a lot of people to understand how they what like even the specific
words that they use to describe certain skills can be sort of signals to them that, you know,
or understand how things will work. And so I remember going to David Kelly and saying like,
oh, I'm debating between these two jobs right now. One is like position A and the other one is
position B. Do you think if I take position B, it'll make it hard for me to do position A stuff
later on? And he was like, Jen, like I'm not an expert in this field, but it's knowable.
And if you don't understand the answer yet, it's because you haven't talked to enough people in
the field. You need to talk to enough people to like wrap your arms around the norms of that
group and then you'll know the answer. So I think the takeaway there for me is like you need to talk
to people to understand what they value and how the community works, but also that it's knowable.
I think a lot of people assume that you can't get that kind of understanding until you've been
working in that industry for multiple years. And certainly your understanding will, you know,
you'll get a lot more once you work in it. But if you talk to a lot of people, you can get like
80, 90 percent of the way there for a job decision, I think.
I want to jump on top of that one because really it's really good about talking to people.
LinkedIn is an incredible tool for making the transition. And maybe I don't know a lot of
people in industry yet. I didn't know. I didn't either at one point. And actually, you'll find
that cold calling on LinkedIn can be very, very effective. I typically look for people who had
like a PhD in their name or who I could see had some academic background or some background
similar to mine, and then just reach out and say like, look, I'm trying to make the transition.
Could you spare 15 minutes to talk to me? These can be very vulnerable conversations.
You're not trying to impress them right now. You're trying, like Jen was saying,
to get like a lay of the land and to scope like how your skills might fit in.
And overwhelmingly, those people actually turn into your backers. Like they'll submit your
resume internally, really just after an hour meeting. Like they'll see that you're like a
thoughtful, resourceful person. And you're a safe bet. But to Jen's point, like you learn the lay
of the land so that you're better prepared to talk about your skills and what you have to offer.
And also to know for where you'd fit in. Absolutely. I see Sita, you had a question
in the chat a bit earlier. Do you want to jump in? Sure. My camera always acts. Oh, there we go.
Hey. So I was really intrigued by the conversation about transitioning from academia to industry.
And I would really like to understand because hopefully that's a direction I would want to
pursue because I am a pure biologist trying to transition into data science. And I work at the
data science lab now at the Hutch. And I'm really trying to understand where I go from knowing all
this intense biology knowledge, which is purely bench skills and now moving into more genomics
and technology driven and using these newer technologies to really understand and answer
genomics questions. But for me, what has been interesting in this even medium shift from being
in the lab to being in a data science lab where people are focusing on building more reproducible
workflows, et cetera. One thing that I feel like there's a stop gap is when I was a postdoc, I was
like leading my project. I was in charge. I was determining the scope and the future of that
project. And here I'm just a part of something which is also really exciting. But then you feel
like a sense of less control in a way and more directed. And I kind of wanted to see what you
guys thought of that. Thanks. My experience has been that like the job levels within data science
are very tied to how much direction versus self-direction you're going to engage in. So
when you come in as like a base level data scientist or analyst, your work is very highly
scoped for you. It tends to be like execute this solution to oversimplify it. You move up a level
and now you're being asked, you know, find a solution to this problem that I'm giving you.
You move up another level to staff and now you're being asked choose which problems are worth
solving. And so like as you move up your scope and the amount of autonomy and responsibility
you have for directing your work, it keeps increasing. But so yeah, I would say like,
you know, your experiences, yeah, as you get started, your work tends to be more scoped.
But then as you demonstrate that you can choose good solutions and choose problems worth solving,
you tend to be given more and more autonomy. And then, you know, the responsibility and promotions
go with that. Yeah, I think the other thing that kind of your question, by the way, I'm loving
this chat. There's so much like good sharing from everybody. But one of the other things that I was
thinking about, too, is that essentially, right, with any job and any organization, there are
tradeoffs. And so I think one of the big tradeoffs with academia, in theory, at least, is that
with academia, you're supposed to get like full intellectual freedom, although hard to get until
you get tenure. But, you know, in theory, you get full academic freedom and you can kind of pursue
and set a lot of your own schedule and your work. And the reason I think you can do that is that
your lab or where you work kind of, they act autonomously, right? They're in their own line
of research, etc. When you go into a company, especially the bigger the company gets,
there are just more interdependencies, right? You're trying to work on things that affect and
interact with more people. But the tradeoff for that is that oftentimes the impact and the reach
is also very different, right? So in academia, you're kind of in your little area. You want to
make an impact. Oftentimes, people do it by building a body of work after many, many decades.
In industry, you kind of get that tradeoff where, I mean, the example I think of is I worked at
ThredUp, where, you know, we're a medium, by the time I left, we were like a medium-sized company,
we were public. I have friends who worked at Meta, where when they send an email to their
customer base, it goes out to 50 million people, right? And so like their scope is actually large,
but their interdependencies are also incredible and the amount of cross-functional work they
have to do is very, very high compared to what I had to do. So I think you just get that tradeoff
depending on where you go. And is that kind of a challenge when it comes to even hiring
pure academics, where they kind of have that, is that one of the challenges when hiring people
who are more traditionally academic and transitioning into this? Or do you find that
people often quickly transition and that's not really something you're thinking of
when hiring people from traditionally academic backgrounds?
I think this goes into that translation piece. I can think of three hiring examples where we
took someone right out of academia and they started at a staff level. That's two
levels up from an entry-level position in data science. And we did that because they demonstrated
their ability to scope and direct their work based on their academic experience.
Like those are those soft skills that I was saying, they're really hard to find. But if you can
translate that soft skill into terms that your hiring manager can understand,
you can come in at a very high level. If you don't come in at such a high level,
I think nonetheless, you would rapidly rise to that level. Because as I said, it's a rare skill
set. And so if you demonstrate it, you will be given the additional autonomy and responsibility
because we need people to do that kind of work. Thank you both. Thank you. I see, Jared, you
had asked a question a little bit earlier about different educational backgrounds for data science.
Do you want to jump in? Hi, Rachel, can you guys hear me okay? Yep. Yeah, so I guess my question is
just more of a blanket statement. But given just from these data science hangouts in general, people
come from such a wide variety of backgrounds when it comes to data scientist positions. Have you guys
found that there are certain educational backgrounds or, I mean, not just technical
skills, we've talked about soft skills, but really just focused on educational backgrounds
that help seem to put people in a better position or seem to be more common than others
and kind of demonstrate a road for success? If you're ready. Rachel, maybe actually I'll jump in
your answer. Yeah. Yeah. So the word self-reliance comes to mind.
Incredibly diverse background among the people I work with. And oftentimes they learn their initial
data skill set in service of, you know, some small business they were running or some side hustle. One
of my favorite stories, one of the guys I work with, he was an online gambler and got really
sophisticated about it. And, you know, you could see how that would play into like predictive
modeling and the data science workflow. And I tend to really see a lot of that where it's just,
you know, they're very like self-driven and self-engaged with their education. And,
you know, I'm not sure how many on the call today are academics. I'm seeing in the chatter that
there's a lot, but, you know, you know that a big part of the PhD is self-education. You know,
the coursework is not like really the emphasis. You have to teach yourself a lot of skills around
programming or figure out how to get the resources you need to learn those new skills. And
so that's the background I see because you're going to continuously be learning on the job.
And so if you can demonstrate that you have a history of doing that, I think that's what sets
you up for success. Are those like that mindset that, you know, you can find the resources you
need to learn the next thing. Yeah. I think also, I think one thing that's kind of challenging
about data science as a field, I think, and I would say the same coming from product is that
it's a more, it's a newer field, right? It's a little bit younger than like software engineering
or some other fields where that those fields have been a little bit more defined for longer.
There are programs you can get an undergrad in engineering. They're like clear leveling paths,
you know, in these tech companies that have been established for a long time.
Data science is a little bit relative to some of these other areas is still evolving quite quickly.
The technology is changing very fast. The methods are changing, you know, even our approach to like
AB testing, I feel like over the last five years has gotten, has gone through like multiple
revolutions. And so I think that is one of the challenges for people coming into it is figuring
out, okay, well, how do I position myself? What do I spend time like investing skills in? And I think
to this point, I think I agree with Joe. I think the ability to learn new things and figure out
like where to learn and grow next is really important. Kind of our earlier point about
talking to people and actually figuring out what's on the cutting edge of the field and what might be
worth worth it and what might not be is really important. And then I think like for academics,
this is actually not dissimilar, I think, to your PhD research is that oftentimes those fields are
changing. If the methods are changing, you want to figure out the best method to answer the question
that you're looking for and you may need to learn new things. So, so I do want to call out, like,
I do think that's something, there's not a very standard, standard path that like, if you just do
these things, things will be guaranteed. And that can make it very tricky. It also means that,
you know, kind of what Joe was saying, your technical skills are not enough. You have to
have this combination of technical skills and the ability to sort of navigate organizations and talk
to people and build relationships, because I think it's the combination of those two things that
makes people, that actually helps them. There's, yeah, there's a piece there that ties a few themes
together, which is like, we mentioned like informational interviewing earlier. So, you know,
you learn how to talk about yourself, you learn about where you're interested. You're also going
to learn what data science means at that company. It's not a standardized definition. And I'll say,
I have generally found there are two verticals. There's like a machine learning AI vertical,
that tends to be about like automating decision making. And if you're automating small decisions,
like what should I put in my cart next? What should I watch next? And then there's an analytics
vertical. And that tends to be very thoughtfully constructing big decisions, like which market
should we pursue next? You know, which product feature should we launch next? And those are
very different. And, you know, you may find that you're more qualified for one or the other. If you
have a ton of machine learning and predictive analytics experience, like maybe going down that
ML path is going to be really promising for you. If you're really into like theory building and
like understanding customer behavior, that analytics vertical can be a fantastic fit.
Because they're not going to call it theory building, but like, what are you doing? Like
you're developing customer narratives, you're trying to understand customer behavior.
And then you're trying to change that behavior in, you know, hopefully positive ways.
And that is very close to the theory building that you did as an academic, they're just,
again, translating, they're not going to call it theory in industry, they're going to call it like
narrative and context. And so I saw a great comment about can I count my years of PhD and
postdoc experience as industry experience? Absolutely. If you can convince the hiring
manager that those years were relevant experience, then they count. And in my mind, they count. And
you should be very confident in claiming that they count. I love in the beginning, we were talking
about like everybody's first jobs, and we were commenting in the chat. But also, in hangouts
before, we've talked about all the different kinds of paths that people take to get to the
roles that they're in now. And I know, not everybody is going to have a PhD, of course,
to go into data science. But I was wondering if you have other guidance for people in that
position when maybe the job posting is calling for that? How do you get past that?
Well, maybe I'll start. I think one thing I do want to kind of set the tone on is that
there is, in my ideal world, when it comes to hiring, how you would do things is that
you actually think about the job that you need to hire for, you step back, and you really think
about what competencies we're really trying to hire for. And then you try to find candidates who
have the ability or the potential to meet those competencies. And those competencies are whatever
skills we're looking for and are somewhat unrelated to, I saw a note about a Stanford PhD,
are unrelated to the school you went to, whether or not you have a PhD. It's very unclear to me if
the PhD is the most efficient way to get any of these skills. So even though both Joe and I have
it, we could have a different conversation about whether or not the PhD is the right thing to do.
So I think that's kind of the ideal world. And actually, a lot of the research on good hiring
practices supports this general model, where you actually want to think about the competencies,
and you actually want to hire for people who have those competencies, no matter how they got them.
Now, the reality of the world is a little bit different than that, which is that
hiring managers are often using proxies to try to get at those things, right? They'll use the degree
as a proxy, they might use the school that you went to as a proxy. And so I just kind of want to
say that out loud as like the first kind of the context, which is the world is not at the ideal
stage, I think that many of us would want to be. And so we have to both like, I was once told,
you know, you want to move the world towards the world that you want it to be, but also recognize
the realities and like, address the realities right on. So I think when there are certain
requirements that are on there, hard requirements, I think you do have to do a little bit more work,
basically, to try to convince somebody. But I do think that that work is possible. And again,
it kind of goes back to, I think, some of the same themes, which is like, if you have a soft
intro to the hiring manager, you've talked to somebody internally, that's a much easier case,
I think, to kind of get your name in the game and actually get that conversation and show that
you have those competencies. I think another way is, I've seen some incredible resumes where they
didn't have sort of the requirements that maybe were listed. But they had a way of basically
articulating the skills that we were looking for, or even in the way that they constructed,
the resume showed us that they would be able to communicate these things very well.
So there are things like that. But I think in today's like hiring environment, which is a
little tighter than it was, you know, a couple of years ago, like one of the biggest things I would
say is like, if you can find a way to get yourself in front of the recruiter or the hiring manager,
like getting in that door is probably one of the hardest steps, I think, in today's hiring
environment. But Joe. So Rachel's initial question was like, you know, if you don't
have the PhD background, like, you know, how can you prepare yourself for this track? And
yeah, I think like Jen and I were alluding, like,
getting a PhD is not the efficient way to gain these skills. It just happens to be the way that
we took. I can tell you my counterpart in the other hand, the other side of the company has no
PhD, we have the same title, like, you know, and his 401k is probably in way better shape.
So you don't need a PhD. It's just that, you know, I wanted to say like, if you have one,
like, there are some skills you inefficiently gained along the way that now you can capitalize
on. But if you're not going that route, um, I said I heard some wonderful advice from someone
I was speaking to a posit conference, they applied at Apple. And the hiring manager told
them gave some great feedback. They're like, you're not ready yet. But here's my advice.
Get a job as an analyst at a small insurance company. And the idea was that then have access
to some like great, highly relevant data. And the idea was just like, while you're in that small
shop, just like knock their socks off. You know, like, use all of the great like open source free
resources that are available in R and Python, and just like build yourself an amazing portfolio.
And I think this was amazing advice, because actually getting a hold of relevant data with
signal in it is hard. It's not available at every company, but like, an insurance company probably
does have it, you know, there's like the right incentives to get that kind of data in place.
So I think, you know, if you put yourself in that kind of environment, where you have access to that
data, and then you use it to build up your skills and demonstrate your skills, like, you know, at
the end of the day, like when you're high, when you're when you're interviewing, you're only going
to get to tell like, two or three stories. You know, I mean, like, it's, it's actually quite
limited how much of yourself you're going to get to show. So like, you know, you think about like,
okay, you know, you, you have a resume with some bullet points of like things you've accomplished,
and you have two or three persuasive stories. If you're really ambitious, like I would recommend
starting a blog so that you can like, you know, do more publication, not publication in the formal
sense, but just publicizing of, you know, your ability to communicate and to make compelling
narrative and compelling data viz. But that would be very ambitious. I rarely see that
even among people we hire a blog would be like, you know, very impressive, but but just again,
you know, find a position where you have access to some interesting data and, and then kind of
just kind of keep building your skills incrementally from there and demonstrating it.
Yeah, you don't need the PhD to do this kind of work. It's more of that self starter,
self reliance that PhD really requires. So it becomes like a signal of that ability,
but it's not the only way. It's like we say, it's a very inefficient way. It takes five or six years.
So I see, Mike, you have your hand raised. You want to jump in here?
Thanks for that. It actually wants to come back to something that Jen just said,
which I think is really important. It's almost like the CV screening process is done by people
who don't actually, you know, they're, they're, they're using something to just to go in, out,
in, out, rather than, you know, a holistic look at what actually that person can do. You know,
and so it's like that, that kind of screening filtering happens way before anyone who has a
data science background might even look at your CV. Sorry, I may be putting words in your mouth,
Jen, but you know, it seems to me that any, those kinds of things are completely arbitrary and
completely unfair because they happen so far removed from the hiring manager sometimes,
that I'm wondering how we redress that. I think, well, I think between Joe and I,
we have experiences with like a wide range of companies, right? So Joe has worked for startups
all the way to big companies. And so I guess like I would say kind of two things here. One is,
so I'll give two examples of my job search, which wasn't, I was actually looking at data science
jobs when I first entered the market. So a couple of things, one, and I'll, I'm going to give my
example, but it's an extreme example. So just like, so I kind of knew in December, I defended
my dissertation in May. I knew in December that I wanted to go into industry. So I just used that
time to informational interview. And I had these hypotheses and I just talked to a lot of people.
I talked to a lot of people. I ended up because I had never done a job in tech. I had no idea what
a recruiter was. I was like, why am I talking? Who is a recruiter? Like, what do they do?
So I did over a hundred informational interviews over six months, which again is extreme. I was
like writing my dissertation and had more flexibility. But the reason I like to tell
this story is that by the time that I applied to jobs, I only applied to maybe eight jobs. It was
an extremely targeted search because I kind of knew which cultures and teams would align with what I
was looking for. And I had some contact at almost every place that I applied for. And I think really
notably the two places where I didn't have any contact, I never heard back from, I did not make
it past the resume screen, but all of the places where I knew a little bit more or had somebody
who was like a third connection, I ended up interviewing and was able to get an offer.
So I think like that's kind of one story is really around the power of, when I tell this story,
I often tell people, you'll either have to do a lot of work by applying to a lot of jobs, right?
And do kind of a scattershot approach and just see who bites. Or you could do a lot of work up front
and talk to a lot of people and then do a more selective search. So the work is there either way.
And then the second thing I would say is I think it really depends on stage of company, right?
So my general impression, though, Joe, you have way more experience than me,
is I think some of these things are harder in larger organizations because they're just more
systems, right? They're getting a lot of people. It's a larger system. There are more screens,
there are recruiters. If you go smaller, and this is kind of the advice that I was given for
for product at the time, I was told that basically it would be impossible for me to
get a product management job with no previous experience. And I think that that is basically
true. To try to break into product at a large company would have basically been almost impossible,
I think, at the time. But it turns out that when I go to a smaller company,
they're looking for very different things. They're looking for people who are self-starters. They're
also they don't have as much leverage for hiring because they can't pay as much as like the big
FANG companies could at the time. And in that situation, I was able to talk directly to the
hiring manager early on, et cetera. So I think the stage of company also will dictate, one,
how formal their system is, two, how many layers you have to go through, and then three, maybe how
accessible it is to chat with people. But that's kind of been my impression and experience. But,
Joe, you might have a lot more to add. Yeah. Sorry, I just saw your ID. It was Smith MK. I
didn't catch your name. But you mentioned Mike. OK. Applying through the online portal,
I never do it. And for the simple reason that even with the great credential,
I would routinely get desk rejected. It requires networking, like cold calls on LinkedIn,
finding people who are second and third degree contacts and asking for introductions.
Now, I will admit that for many people, even for me, that is painful and unwanted activity.
But you can flip that around and think of it as your advantage that most people aren't willing
to engage in that kind of knocking on doors, essentially, cold calling to network their way
in. Now, once you get that referral, now you have a much higher likelihood of actually getting the
initial part of the interview started. But that kind of networking doesn't end at the interview
process. That's a big part of the job, too. I mean, once you're internal, so you know,
congratulations, you've now been hired and you're doing work. Well, you're still going to need to
figure out how to network within your company in order for your projects to get greenlit,
for your projects to go into production. That is a skill unto itself, too. And so if I see
candidates who are doing that networking in order to get that internal referral, that's a good
signal to me that they're going to be willing to do the kind of personal networking when they're
inside the company as well. Submitting to the portal and hoping for the best is just such
low likelihood. And once you're inside, finishing your project and pushing to GitHub and hoping for
the best, that's not going to be enough. You're going to need to figure out whose buy-in do you
need, get their feedback in advance. It's like they're completely parallel processes,
getting into the company and then performing once you're inside the company.
A question that I love to ask in the Hangouts is what's a piece of career advice that you've
received or maybe that you've given that stands out to you? I don't know if Jen,
you want to start with this one? Sure. So actually, mine is Joe. Joe and I just got
this like years ago. So when I was looking for my first job, I think, Joe, like maybe you and
Bella had this heuristic or something, which is like in any job, you can really only optimize
for two things, or at least that's like a way of thinking about it. Like you can only optimize for
two things and everything else that you get is like bonus or is great that it comes with a package.
But once you try to optimize for more than two things, the equation gets like very complicated
and the set of jobs that you can take might become too narrow. So an example is if you
care about geography, pay, mission, culture, growth, you can list all these values that you
have and that you want out of your next job. It probably is like doable to get something where
you're mission aligned and get like a salary or comp package that you're happy with. It's probably
possible to get a geography and a comp package that you want. It's much harder to try to get all
three in that first job or in the current job that you want. And so I really love this piece
of advice because there are a couple underlying principles here. One is that it means that you
need to get really clear on what you want, right? And I think that some people, and I've fallen
into this myself too, it's like people approach you with a job, you get excited about it, but you
actually didn't start from a place where you were really grounded in your own values and what's
really important to you. So I think that's a great starting point is really thinking about like what
do you want and what's most important to you in this next step. And then the second piece that I
really like about this piece of advice is that, and there are many other frameworks, I've heard
people be like list your top three priorities and three extra criteria, et cetera, et cetera.
But the other thing I like about this is that it really puts me at least in a mindset where
careers are not made by one job, right? So just because in that one job you're optimizing maybe
say for comp and geography doesn't mean that your entire career will not be focused on culture,
mission, and things like that. And I think thinking of your career and your jobs as
steps along the way that's building like a larger career portfolio has been really useful for me. So
I think you need to think about what are your non-negotiables, like one of them for me is
culture. But within that, I think just having a sense of prioritization is really useful. So thanks,
Joe. I think a really good piece of advice is it's easy to think you need to build a lot of
new skills in order to make a transition. And I don't think that's true. I think you should focus
on polishing your existing skills rather than building new ones. Once you're in the job,
then you can build new ones. But just you have a lot more skills than you realize.
And if you just polish those and then like refine them, you know, if you're doing multiple
regression in your work, great. But I want you to know multiple regression like all the way down to
the foundations before, you know, you don't need to start learning like every machine learning
technique in the book. You know, you can get a first job just on multiple regression, but know
it really well. And just tied to that, though, is that doesn't mean that the job you're qualified
for now is going to sound exactly like your PhD dissertation. I see a lot of people like overly
narrowly define themselves because that's what academia promotes you to do is you're like you
get very narrowly defined in your identity and then you look for a job that sounds like that.
And I just encourage you to be open minded. You know, think more about like, you know,
if you if you have a background in like, you know, science or like diversity and inclusion,
you know, yeah, there are job titles that are called like diversity and inclusion officer,
and that's open to you. Or, and you could be a product manager and just bring that amazingly
unique perspective to the role and be an amazing product manager or a people manager who builds a
team where people can thrive. It doesn't need to be your formal job title that maps like exactly to
your, you know, your PhD dissertation. You know, you can just bring that perspective to a traditional
role and excel at it. Russ, I see you have your hand raised. Do you want to add something here?
Uh, yes. Can you hear me? Yep, I can. Okay, something different, but I think extremely
important to hear. I work as a professional recruiter. I'm transitioning into data science.
This has nothing to do with data science. This is encouragement for all of you who have been
in the situation I'm about to describe for my friend. I've been working with a friend at the
same company for, I don't know, four or five years. My friend, you know, transferred, got promoted,
transferred, got promoted and wound up in a spot that was not good. I found out two days ago my
friend was fired. Okay, so I contacted my friend. I said, hey, let me rewrite your resume, you know,
put on qualifications, stuff like that, because I can do that. And my friend already has interviews
lined up. What it means is my friend did really well in work environment. So one, two, three,
and four, but number five was a bad match. That's not a reflection of my friend. My friend's going
to get going moving forward. If you've had bad experiences, and we all have, that's not a
reflection on you. It's just a bad match. Keep moving forward. That's how you succeed.
Absolutely. I have to agree. I feel like, you know, part of the, we've talked about like the
hard skills and the soft skills, and then the other kind of career skill overall is that
we're all just people trying to figure out what work environment works best for us, and what kind
of people we want to work with, and what kind of problems. And, you know, this is something I think
people are not talking about when you're younger in school, which is you might like the subject,
but do you like the day-to-day? Is there a particular management style that you like?
You know, what's the mix of meetings and focus time that works best for you? And I think thinking
about your career as a self-exploration to understand what works best for you is ultimately
kind of what this is all about. So one job is just one job, but it's all building a body of knowledge
to figure out what works best for every single person, which is going to be different. And that's
exciting, I think. Eugene, I know this was a bit earlier. I'm not sure if you're still on,
but you had a comment around like this idea of being obsessed with correctness,
and when businesses don't necessarily prioritize on that. Do you want to jump in here?
Sure. I've had, I have a lot of academic training, and I've never been much of an academic
person. I feel very pragmatically driven. It was like 20% of the work was getting new results,
but 80% was always saying how wrong they might be, and reporting on the different ways to do
things that might end up wrong or where your data came from, and I never enjoyed that part of it.
But the people that I've worked with, the more academic they are, and one of the people I work
closest with right now is an MD PhD, and it never feels like some of the tasks that we work on
together are done enough or correct enough or accurate enough, and it creates this
I can never really tell the people who depend on our deliverables how done he feels, or a former
co-worker, we were fine-tuning financial marketing models together, and he would say,
but this is wrong. This is not the way to do it, and I would constantly have to say,
does the data validate that there is lift or that we're getting
incremental lift or that the modeling is actually producing gains? Would it work if you put this in,
does the data show that this might work? And he would say, yes, but this is not the right way to
do it. So it was this, I felt like when working with a lot of academics, they wanted so much more
They wanted so much more completeness and accuracy and certainty about their approach to be
validated by research, validated by other people who know the exact way to do
small statistics, large statistics. I mean, I think one of the funniest things, you guys
can riff on this as long as you want, but when you get into big data, every single thing you measure
is statistically significant, every single one. So what do you do when every possible number
has error bars this tiny? And it's really hard to get people past that frame of mind
from what my experience is with academics in business. I think that actually points out a good
transition point of like, what are the standards you're working to? If you are doing basic
research and you're trying to build knowledge, then having this exclusive body of
rigorous findings is the goal. That's not the goal at most businesses. Again, if you're
doing medical research, then that's different. You actually, there is more of a
scientific goal in there. But oftentimes, you think of businesses or often it's more of
an investment strategy. And so now it's not about building an exclusive body of knowledge, it's
about really optimal stopping. How long should we explore for so that we can exploit that
knowledge for maximum gain? And that's a different standard. It's not a lower
standard, it's a different goal. And then that goal brings with it a different standard. So
that's a change of mindset that you should be prepared to make. It's not
going to serve you well to bring over academic standards to an environment where those won't
serve you. So yeah, most business settings are going to be more about optimization than they are about
building scientific knowledge, although there will be some overlap.
But yeah, it's a different standard is my answer.
Yeah, and Eugene, your question kind of reminds me of a conversation I had very early on when I
first got into industry, which was that, you know, in academia, what we care about is,
if you get a result, like, let's say you run an experiment, and, you know, your null result is
like nothing, or you're, you know, the kind of the worst case is basically nothing changes,
right? Like, that's like, in academia, that's like the worst case. Now you don't have anything that
you can report on. But if you get an unexpected result, either way, it's more positive than you
thought, or it's more negative than you thought. Now you have an interesting result. And you can
talk about it and try to figure out causality and all these things. In business, kind of to
Joe's point, if academia is about building knowledge, in business, I say a lot of the
times, it's just about reducing risk. So a lot of the time, the standard of decision making
is we don't want, actually, a good result would be like that nothing changes, or it's positive.
And the bad result is if it makes the outcomes that we care about worse, right? And so that's,
that, to me, is such a fundamental change in how you look at it. Because if you're trying to be
like, oh, should we roll out this change in our business? Really, what a lot of leaders care
about is they just want to make sure that it doesn't make things worse, right? And so either
if it's the same or better, then that's great. But that same result in academia, if it's the same,
is seen as like a not very valuable result. And I think that that shift is quite fundamental.
And it's understandable, I think that many people struggle with that shift, because,
you know, you're in any organization with its own values set and things like that, you do absorb
that way of thinking. And sometimes it needs to be called out extremely explicitly to help
people understand how they were thinking before. Because before in academia, everybody thought this
way, there was no need to call it out at all. You know, and so sometimes it's hard to identify when
you're actually in a different kind of cultural environment. I know this time goes by so quickly.
So one other question I'd love for us to get to is I know a lot of us are in a position where
we're hoping to advance our career, maybe get the next promotion, and was wondering what advice you
may have for some of us who are in that position right now. You know, we talked earlier about like
networking. And I think that, you know, promotion is often has a has a social component. Not to say
it's popularity contest, it is say like, you need to be well aligned with, you know, your lead your
managers and leaders about like, what skills, what demonstrations are going to warrant that
promotion. And so, you know, if you're, if you're seeking promotion within your company, like my
advice would be like, start that as an explicit conversation, you know, with your manager about
like, what are the skills that you know, you need to see demonstrated? What are the, you know,
accomplishments that, you know, you need to see so that it's not like a mystery that arrives at the
end of the year, but it's like an explicit conversation. And then, you know, you don't
have to, you don't have to stop there, like, you know, look around at who else is getting promoted,
you know, within your org and like, reading between the lines of like, well, what have
they accomplished that distinguish them from, you know, the rest of their, their peers. And
I think that, you know, getting aligned on expectations, but also like just being
a lot of this just keeps coming back to like being very resourceful and self driven about
like finding a path to, to your goals. And, you know, if you're willing to do that, I think
you have a lot more opportunity to, to attain promotion. Yeah, I think, yeah, we keep coming
back to the same themes over and over, right, which is like, you need to find a way to carve
your own path to some extent, when it's not that clear and talking to people. I think for promotion,
one story kind of comes to mind of kind of earlier when I first jumped to industry,
which is I was a very process oriented person. You know, I really believe that if you set up
good processes, you basically bias all of your outcomes towards everything is kind of I looked
at things like very probabilistically. So it's like, I'll set up a good process. That means that,
you know, the probability that I get a better outcome is sort of determined in terms of how
you make those decisions. And so I used to, I spent my first six months on the job talking all
about these new processes I had implemented and how great they were. And I have, I got feedback
that was kind of like, we're an outcomes driven organization, Jen, like all this talk of process,
like it's not doing it for us. And I remember my first reaction was just sort of like frustration.
I was like, come on, the process is so important. But I think it kind of goes to this advice,
which is that different organizations will value different things. And every organization
is its own little fiefdom with its own set of values. So you want to spend time getting that
feedback, figuring out what actually matters and how it's talked about and how it's framed.
I ended up taking a lot of the same things that I used to talk about from a process perspective,
and I just kind of framed it and was able to show how it led to outcome. And I would really focus
on talking about the outcomes. And it was a total turnaround in terms of how people perceived
the contributions that I made, even though it was the same kind of work, right? So I think
that's one thing is like, figure out what matters to the org. And then the second thing I would say
about promotion is that increasingly, I think at some levels, you know, depending on your track,
the promotions end up being like similar work. But also at a certain point, there's some promotions
that lead to jobs that have like different, it's like a different job, right? Like, I kind of at
some point was an IC and went to a manager and it was ended up being a very different job. And so
one last thing I kind of wanted to add here is that increasingly now, I'm trying to really step
back and be like, is this a promotion I actually want? And is this kind of promotion at this
company, the kind of promotion that I want? Because there are times in my career so far,
where the work that I've loved to do the most was actually when I was kind of in a different role
and had slightly different responsibilities. And so obviously now with a bit of like hindsight
and reflection, I can think about what are the elements that I really loved. But this goes back
to our earlier point about how I think ultimately all of this is really about trying to figure out
what's the right fit for you. And sometimes that's correlated with role and title, and sometimes
that's not. And sometimes it's correlated with the role and title at your company, but may not
be correlated somewhere else. So just kind of the broader, just wanted to mention that.
I'll tag on one more thing I just thought of, which was,
so at Intuit, they have this principles community. So they get all of the principle level,
like engineers and data scientists together, and we talk. And one thing that came out of
that meeting recently that was really interesting was just this theme of willingness to take
informed risk. And I think this is actually, in hindsight, a really important theme of,
like, promotion is not assured. You're probably going to have to take some informed risks.
And maybe that means investing your time and learning a new modeling technique or a new,
I don't know what that's going to be for you. But that means investing time and you're taking
a risk. Maybe it won't work out. You're not going to get promoted on that project.
But it was something that came out of a lot of people independently in that room was that
willingness to take informed risk. And maybe there were a lot of people who weren't in the
room because their informed risks didn't work out. But I think that that willingness to take a bet on
yourself and pursue something that not everyone else is doing can be really important if you're
seeking promotion. Yeah, thank you so much. I think that question had been top of mind for me
lately because I was talking to somebody who was saying they, like, save, like, their whole work
week, they save 40 hours a week by doing, like, parameterized cordo documents. And they were
advocating for a promotion for themselves. And I was thinking, wow, that's amazing. You just
made all this new time for yourself. Like, you could possibly use that in getting this promotion.
And just, like, kind of flipping that mindset a little bit. Yeah, well. Yeah, I mean, that's a
great example. That wasn't something that was defined for them. Like, no one was saying, oh,
this is how you should do your job. Like, they took a totally new approach to how to accomplish
their job and saved an enormous amount of time. And I think those kind of examples are, like,
great ways to demonstrate that you have the, like, scoping and autonomy abilities that warrant the
next level. Absolutely. Well, I feel like we could all keep talking about this stuff forever. And
this hour went by really, really quickly. But thank you so much, Jen and Joe, for joining and
sharing your experience with us all. This has been great. Yeah, thank you. Well, the questions
have been so thoughtful. I've just been, I've been learning a lot from the questions. I'm like, oh,
great questions. It is really fun to read through the chat. So if anybody wants to save the chat,
there's those little three dots on the bottom there. And you can just click save chat too.
But Jen and Joe, if people want to get connected with you, is LinkedIn the best place?
Yeah. Okay. Awesome. Well, thank you all so much. Have a great rest of the day.
Thank you, everybody. Bye. Thank you.